enhancements/update/targeted-update-edge-blocking: Propose a new enhancement (#821)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/update/targeted-update-edge-blocking.md

// conditions. Consumers interested in the set of updates that are
// actually recommended for this cluster should use
// availableUpdates. This list may be empty if no updates are
// recommended, if the update service is unavailable, or if an empty
// or invalid channel has been specified.
// +optional
conditionalUpdates []ConditionalUpdate `json:"conditionalUpdates,omitempty"`
```

The `availableUpdates` documentation will be adjusted to read:

```go
// availableUpdates contains updates recommended for this
// cluster. Updates which appear in conditionalUpdates but not in
// availableUpdates may expose this cluster to known issues. This list
// may be empty if no updates are recommended, if the update service
// is unavailable, or if an invalid channel has been specified.
```

The new ConditionalUpdate type will have the following schema:

```go
// ConditionalUpdate represents an update which is recommended to some
// clusters on the version the current cluster is reconciling, but which
// may not be recommended for the current cluster.
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen=true
type ConditionalUpdate struct {
	// release is the target of the update.
	// +required

> 	release Release `json:"release"`

Reviewer: nit, must be `Release Release `json:"release"`` for json serializer

Author: Thanks; fixed with e8c0849 -> 3369334.

	// risks represents the range of issues associated with
	// updating to the target release. The cluster-version
	// operator will evaluate all entries, and only recommend the
	// update if there is at least one entry and all entries
	// recommend the update.
	// +optional

> 	Risks []ConditionalUpdateRisk `json:"risks,omitempty"`

Reviewer: I expected this to be non-optional and require at least one element.  If we have no known risks, this is not a conditional update is it?

Author: Right, it's not conditional.  But I don't see a lot of benefit to requiring these either, as discussed in the *Metadata to include when blocking a conditional request* section.  I do expect us to always supply at least one risk as a policy move.  But from a consumer perspective, optional vs. required here just allows you to switch between:

> Update to A is not recommended, because the upstream update service didn't give me a `risk`, so I don't know what I'm avoiding.

and:

> Update to A is not recommended, because the upstream update service didn't give me a `risk`, and that's breaking the rules of the API!

With my cluster admin hat on, both of those would be enough to understand that I needed to talk to the folks running my `upstream` update service.

Reviewer 2: @deads2k This one is a method for us to unconditionally block edges while still providing explanations for why we're doing so which has been sorely missed in the past, to the point that we're shipping "Text Only Errata" notices whenever we block edges today which are most likely stale or inaccurate before they even reach a customer's inbox.

For all of your other comments where you feel that things are required I agree that they should be required of OCP's Cincinnati service but we're also trying to be flexible enough in the API implementation to allow other update service providers the flexibility to forego our more rigid policy. Does this make sense?

We will most likely implement linters to ensure that our curated data makes these fields mandatory.

Reviewer: @sdodson why model that as a conditional update with no risks instead of a conditional update with an "AlwaysRisky" (or some similar) type?

Reviewer 2: I like this suggestion of a risk `type: always`

	// conditions represents the observations of the conditional update's
	// current status. Known types are:
	// * Evaluating, for whether the cluster-version operator will attempt to evaluate any risks[].matchingRules.
	// * Recommended, for whether the update is recommended for the current cluster.
	// +patchMergeKey=type
	// +patchStrategy=merge
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=type
	Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty" patchStrategy:"merge" patchMergeKey:"type" protobuf:"bytes,1,rep,name=conditions"`
}
```

The new ConditionalUpdateRisk type will have the following schema:

```go
// ConditionalUpdateRisk represents a reason and cluster-state
// for not recommending a conditional update.
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen=true
type ConditionalUpdateRisk struct {
	// url contains information about this risk.

> 	// +optional

Reviewer: I think you should require this

Author: I have a *Metadata to include when blocking a conditional request* section discussing this.  Not clear to me if you have new arguments to add there, or if you are saying "I agree with those pros and cons, but have decided that the resulting decision needs to require all of these in this new API".

Reviewer 3: Agree with David, but we tighten this later on

	URL URL `json:"url,omitempty"`

	// reason is the CamelCase reason for not recommending a
	// conditional update, in the event that matchingRules match the
	// cluster state.

> 	// +optional

Reviewer: If this is your key, it must be required.

Author: It's not a key, it's a slug.  And it's just passed blindly along before getting dropped into [the API's existing `+optional` `reason` property][1] (unless the CVO has multiple slugs it wants to feed into a single `Recommended` condition's `reason`, in which case it will substitute `MultipleReasons` or similar).

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/67c28690af52a69e0b8fa565916fe1b9b7f52f10/config/v1/types_cluster_operator.go#L131-L133

	Reason string `json:"reason,omitempty"`

	// message provides additional information about the risk of
	// updating, in the event that matchingRules match the cluster
	// state. This is only to be consumed by humans. It may
	// contain Line Feed characters (U+000A), which should be
	// rendered as new lines.

> 	// +optional

Reviewer: I think you should require this

Author: Why be more strict than [my consumer][1]?  I agree from a policy perspective that we are unlikely to leave this empty. 
 Although I still don't understand what was going in with openshift/cincinnati-graph-data#918.  But then again, that was a tombstone, and not a blocked edge.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/67c28690af52a69e0b8fa565916fe1b9b7f52f10/config/v1/types_cluster_operator.go#L138

	Message string `json:"message,omitempty"`

	// matchingRules is a slice of conditions for deciding which

> 	// clusters have the update recommended (happy conditions) and

Reviewer: in the API PR, we'll need to refine this.  It's not entirely clear from this whether matching means this cluster is at risk or if matching means this cluster is not at risk.

Author: the language you link is outdated.  If you feel like something on the existing language still needs to get hashed out in this enhancement, please open a new thread on the new language.

	// which do not (sad conditions). The slice is ordered by
	// decreasing precedence. The cluster-version operator will
	// walk the slice in order, and stop after the first it can
	// successfully evaluate. If no condition can be successfully
	// evaluated, the update will not be recommended.

> 	// +optional

Reviewer: I think you should require this

In those cases there is currently tension between wanting to protect vulnerable clusters by blocking the edge vs. wanting to avoid inconveniencing clusters which we know are not vulnerable and whose administrators may have been planning on taking the recommended update.
This enhancement aims to reduce that tension.

### Goals

* [Cincinnati graph-data][graph-data] maintainers will have the ability to block edges for a vulnerable subset of clusters.

### Non-Goals

* Exactly scoping the set of blocked clusters to those which would have been impacted by the issue.
    For example, some issues may be races where the impacted cluster set is a random subset of the vulnerable cluster set.
    Any targeting of the blocked edges will reduce the number of blocked clusters which would have not been impacted, and thus reduce the contention between protecting vulnerable clusters and inconveniencing invulnerable clusters.
* Specifying a particular update service implementation.
    This enhancement floats some ideas, but the details of the chosen approach are up to each update service's maintainers.

## Proposal

### Enhanced graph-data schema for blocking edges

> [The blocked-edges schema][block-edges] will be extended with the following new properties:

Reviewer 4: why did we decide this belongs in the "blocked edges" schema and not the "edges" schema?  it's slightly odd that they are defined as "conditionally blocked edges" here, but then get translated into "conditionally allowed edges" in the next section.

Reviewer 4: (i'm guessing this is tied to wanting the default behavior of older clients to be that it treats this content as always blocked, since it can't parse/understand the conditions, so maybe we can't reconcile the two)

Reviewer 5: We already have https://github.com/openshift/cincinnati-graph-data/tree/master/blocked-edges in in practice. Which Cincinnati graph builder understands. @wking you might want to explictly mention what we have in production.

Author: Yeah, there is no "edges schema" in graph-data.  I tried to sell folks on making edges a first-class graph-data concept explicit in #1, but lost out to loading edges dynamically from release-image metadata.  I'll reroll to include that context.

Reviewer 2: @bparees Does the additional context help or does this still seem worth considering other options?

Reviewer 4: it helps.

> * `url` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a URI documenting the blocking reason.

Author: It is scoped by directory, so I prefer `url`.  But I'm also not strongly against echoing "block" in the new property names.  Let's collapse this discussion into [this thread][1], and then apply whatever consensus comes out of that to all the new properties.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/821#discussion_r665626938

    For example, this could link to a bug's impact statement or knowledge-base article.

> * FIXME: [also reason/message?](#metadata-to-include-when-blocking-a-conditional-request)

Reviewer 5: I am not sure if we need this. Can you add an example for this as well.

Author: I tried to add an example in the linked *Metadata to include when blocking a conditional request* section.  If the `InvalidRouteHostSupport` example there is unclear, can you open a new thread on one of the unclear lines?

* `clusters` (optional, [object][json-object]), defining the subset of affected clusters.
  If any `clusters` property matches a given cluster, the edge should be blocked for that cluster.
  If `clusters` is unset, the edge is blocked for all clusters.
  * `promql` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a [PromQL][] query describing affected clusters.
    This query will be evaluated on the local cluster, so it has access to data beyond the subset that is [uploaded to Telemetry][uploaded-telemetry].
    The query should return a 0 if the update should be allowed and a 1 if the update should be blocked.

>   * FIXME: [`platform` or other properties that are easier to evaluate than PromQL?](#non-promql-filters)

Author: For `platform`, I was thinking it would be comparing vs [Infrastructure's `status.platformStatus.type`][1].  But you could do the same thing with metrics/PromQL in cluster, so it's mostly a convenience for graph-data admins.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/46e2fe0468512c88595dbc5997d890a97f2efb43/config/v1/types_infrastructure.go#L237-L248

>   * FIXME: [`platform` or other properties that are easier to evaluate than PromQL?](#non-promql-filters)

Author: To Cincinnati and other graph-data consumers, these are opaque strings, so I see no risk there.  For the CVO and other in-cluster Cincinnati consumers, there is a risk that a malicious Cincinnati update service could feed you bogus data (this risk exists today) or (new with this enhancement) exploits some Prom flaw to compromise or DoS your cluster.  I'll add a section on that.

>   * FIXME: [`platform` or other properties that are easier to evaluate than PromQL?](#non-promql-filters)

Author: I've rebased onto master and stubbed in this attack vector with a034a69 -> 97c2bf1 (there's a FIXME where I'm waiting for feedback from monitoring folks, but we'll get that handled before we land this).  I have not taken a stab at Scott's key/value thing, but more on that over in [this thread][1], so I'll go ahead and mark this one resolved.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/821#discussion_r663170459

>   * FIXME: [`platform` or other properties that are easier to evaluate than PromQL?](#non-promql-filters)

Reviewer 6: I don't think we can put any effective safe-guard on this. Sure, there is a few things we can do to avoid expensive queries, like only allowing certain metrics to be queried or disallowing range vectors for example (getting all samples for the last year for example is rather heavy). However I'm not aware of a way to apriori tell whether a query will cause heavy load/return a huge number of samples for the general case.

>   * FIXME: [`platform` or other properties that are easier to evaluate than PromQL?](#non-promql-filters)

Author: I've added a link to [MON-1772](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-1772) with 97c2bf1 -> 66ecf6a.

[The schema version][graph-data-schema-version] would also be bumped to 1.1.0, because this is a backwards-compatible change.
Consumers who only understand graph-data schema 1.0.0 would ignore the `clusters` property and block the edge for all clusters.
The alternative of failing open is discussed [here](#failing-open).

### Enhanced Cincinnati JSON representation

[The Cincinnati graph API][cincinnati-api] will be extended with a new top-level `conditionalEdges` property, with an array of conditional edge [objects][json-object] using the following schema:

* `from` (required, [string][json-string]), with the `version` of the starting node.
* `to` (required, [string][json-string]), with the `version` of the ending node.
* `qualifiers` (optional, [array][json-array], with qualifications around the recommendation.
  Each entry is an [object][json-object] with the following schema:
  * `url` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a URI documenting the issue, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
  * FIXME: [also reason/message?](#metadata-to-include-when-blocking-a-conditional-request)

>   * `clusters` (optional, [object][json-object]).

Reviewer 4: this name is slightly weird for how it is used.......  would `blockedClusters` help clarify?

we are after all defining an edge.  Clusters is indicating the clusters this edge does NOT apply to.

Author: The release image itself defines the edge, by declaring an initial set of versions which can be updated to it.  These `blocked-edges/...` entries prune that list of recommendations.  This new `clusters` property limits the scope of that blocking/pruning to specific clusters.  I'm personally fine with inheriting that context from the `blocked-edges/` directory name, like we do with the existing `from` and `to`, but I'm not set against `blockedClusters` or similar, if folks think the closer echo is useful.  Thoughts?

Reviewer 4: i think fundamentally it would be useful to always say "conditionallyBlocked[edges]" or "conditionallyAllowed[edges]" anytime we are using "conditional" in this api.  And then the "clusters" query defines the condition under which the thing is blocked(or allowed).

Alternatively, if we call them "conditionalEdges" then i'd expect the fields within that struct to indicate what influence they have on the condition, e.g. "allowConditions" and "blockConditions" or just "allow" and "block" (in case you want to default to allow vs default to block)

    If any `clusters` property matches a given cluster, the edge is not recommended for that cluster, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
    If `clusters` is unset, the edge is blocked for all clusters.
    * `promql` (optional, [object][json-object]), defining the subset of affected clusters, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
    * FIXME: [`platform` or other properties that are easier to evaluate than PromQL?](#non-promql-filters)

### Enhanced ClusterVersion representation

[The ClusterVersion `status`][api-cluster-version-status] will be extended with a new `conditionalUpdates` property:

```go
// conditionalUpdates contains the list of updates that are
// conditionally recommended for this cluster. Consumers interested
// in the set of updates that are actually recommended for this

> // cluster should use availableUpdates. This list may be empty if no

Reviewer 5: ```
// Consumers interested
// in the set of updates that are actually recommended for this
// cluster should use availableUpdates.
```
The relationship between and `conditionalUpdates` and `availableUpdates` is confusing. We should keep it simple i.e. users needs to see only in `availableUpdates` and if there is nothing in available updates then they should find the rule that has eliminated the versions from it.

Reviewer 5: Can we rename `conditionalUpdates` to `notRecommendedByOSUS` or something similar?

Author: > We should keep it simple i.e. users needs to see only in availableUpdates...

That's what this comment is saying, isn't it?  And then folks who are interested in the new-with-this-enhancement supported-but-not-recommended-for-this-cluster edges look at `conditionalUpdates` entries with `Recommended!=True`.  And between the two, that's all the supported edges.

Reviewer 4: the comment says:
```
// conditionalUpdates contains the list of updates that are
// conditionally recommended for this cluster.
```

If entries in conditionalUpdates can contain a "Recommended==false" field/attribute, then i'd say the comment isn't accurate.  It's not the list of edges that are `conditionally recommended`.  It's the list of edges which have conditions on them, and your cluster may or may not meet the condition that allows/recommends the upgrade.

If your cluster does meet the requirements such that a conditionalEdge upgrade should be allowed, will that update also appear in availableUpdates?

Reviewer 4: ```
// availableUpdates contains the subset of conditionalUpdates that
// apply to this cluster.  Updates which appear in conditionalUpdates
// but not in availableUpdates may expose this cluster to known
// issues.
```

answers some of my questions, but i think still calls for cleanup of the godoc on conditionalUpdates.  These are not updates that are "conditionally recommended for this cluster", they are "updates that have conditions on them, your cluster may or may not meet the conditions that would allow this upgrade to be recommended for your cluster"

i also think we need to standardize on how we're using the term condition.  If the cluster "meets the condition" does that mean the edge is blocked (we detected the vulnerable condition on your cluster and blocked the edge for you), or does it mean the edge is allowed (you fulfill the conditions required to allow this edge)?

Reviewer 7: I found this confusing as well and my opinion of what `conditionalUpdates` contained changed once I read the `availbleUpdates` comment.

// updates are recommended, if the update service is unavailable, or
// if an empty or invalid channel has been specified.
// +optional
conditionalUpdates []ConditionalUpdate `json:"conditionalUpdates,omitempty"`
```

The `availableUpdates` documentation will be adjusted to read:

```go
// availableUpdates contains the subset of conditionalUpdates that
// apply to this cluster.  Updates which appear in conditionalUpdates
// but not in availableUpdates may expose this cluster to known

> // issues.

Reviewer 5: I do not like the current text as it is not user friendly. It should be 
```
availableUpdates contains the updates or versions which is recommended by the OpenShift Update Service (OSUS) for this cluster.
```

Reviewer 5: We can add that there may be more versions available in general but not recommended for this cluster for cluster specific configurations and for more details check the the other property i.e. conditionalUpdates

Author: > ...OpenShift Update Service (OSUS) for this cluster...

OSUS is our sub-product.  The cluster may be configured to point a a different `upstream` update service.  [The `upstream` godocs][1] use "update server", which I'm fine softening to "update service" (clients should not care if the service is backed by multiple servers or a single server).  But I'd rather keep our implementation-specific name out of these implementation-agnostic docs.  "subset" is wrong, though; I'll reroll to drop that.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/6318df75be26bf34a80ecd098ccd5a5454e3aa62/config/v1/types_cluster_version.go#L56

```

The new ConditionalUpdate type will have the following schema:

```go
// ConditionalUpdate represents an update which is recommended to some
// clusters on the version the current cluster is reconciling, but which
// may not be recommended for the current cluster.
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen=true

> type ConditionalUpdate struct {

Author: One for each target.  I need to reroll to add another slice layer to allow for that...

> type ConditionalUpdate struct {

Author: Structure adjusted in [today's reroll][1].

The operator will grow a new `warning`-level `CannotEvaluateConditionalUpdates` alert that fires if `lastTransitionTime` for any `Recommended=Unknown` condition is over an hour old.

Any `conditionalUpdates` with `Recommended=True` will have its release inserted into `availableUpdates`.

Both `availableUpdates` and `conditionalUpdates` should be sorted in decreasing SemVer order for stability, to avoid unnecessary status churn.

### Update client support for the enhanced schema

[The web-console][web-console] and [`oc`][oc] both consume ClusterVersion to present clients with a list of available updates.
With this enhancement, they will both be extended to consume [`conditionalUpdates`](#enhanced-clusterversion-representation).
When listing recommended updates, clients will list the contents of `availableUpdates`.
When listing all supported updates, clients will additionally include entries from `conditionalUpdates` with `Recommended!=True`, and include the `reason` and `message` from the `Recommended` condition alongside the supported-but-not-recommended updates.
Clients may optionally provision for reporting additional condition types, in case new types are added in the future.

> ### User Stories

Reviewer 4: i'd like to see a little more about the admin experience here.  Some of this may be my own lack of experience w/ the upgrade UX, but working an example of what an admin sees when the following potential updates for their cluster exist:

1) an unconditioned edge
2) a conditioned edge that their cluster qualifies for
3) a conditioned edge that their cluster does not qualify for
4) a conditioned edge that could not be evaluated

how/where is that information presented, and what are the implications if they want to choose each of the 4.  (e.g. when is a force required)

Related to this, could we deliberately use this feature to force an admin to decide if an upgrade edge was appropriate for them or not?  (the condition would never evaluate to "true", but would direct them to documentation for how they can decide if they want to consume the update or not....and then if they did decide to do so, how would they do so(force?))

Author: > ...and then if they did decide to do so, how would they do so(force?)...

There is a common misconception that ClusterVersion's `force` and `oc adm upgrade`'s `--force` are related to an update edge's being recommended.  In fact, they are orthogonal. 
 openshift/api#885 has been in flight without much interest so far to remove some misleading godocs.

So the only guards around supported/recommended updates today are in ClusterVersion clients like `oc` and the web console.  I haven't been all that prescriptive about their handling if the new cases here.  And I don't see a need to distinguish between your (1) and (2).  The lines slightly above your comment here are my attempt at (3) and (4), as two separate conditions for "conditional and not known to be recommended to you".  Would walking through some mock `oc` flows be helpful to ground the abstract discussion in examples?

Reviewer 4: > There is a common misconception that ClusterVersion's force and oc adm upgrade's --force are related to an update edge's being recommended. 

let me try again:

and then if they did decide to do so, how would they do so(--allow-explicit-upgrade?))

>  And I don't see a need to distinguish between your (1) and (2). 

as a risk averse admin, i want to know if you're recommending this edge to everyone or not.  I don't trust you to tell me my cluster isn't going to be affected.  (maybe my prom data is wrong, maybe you didn't root cause the problem correctly yet, maybe your detection logic is wrong.... i don't want to be the guinea pig)

>  The lines slightly above your comment here are my attempt at (3) and (4), as two separate conditions for "conditional and not known to be recommended to you".

i don't see case (4) called out there ("we failed to evaluate the condition")

>  Would walking through some mock oc flows be helpful to ground the abstract discussion in examples?

sample output would be great

Author: > i don't see case (4) called out there ("we failed to evaluate the condition")

That would be `Recommended=Unknown`, with a reason and message.  Other points are good, and I'll add an `oc` workthrough to try and hit all of them.

* We can process the graph with tooling that removes all `conditionalEdges` and look for any supported versions without exit paths.

## Design Details

### Open Questions

#### Metadata to include when blocking a conditional request

A URI seems like the floor here.
But do we want other information as well?
For example, a reason and message so we can say:

```Text
Reason: InvalidRouteHostSupport
Message: Updating to 4.7.12 is supported, but not recommended, because your cluster contains routes with invalid spec.host.  For more details, see https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1957584#c19
```

The benefit would be that folks would have some context about what they'd see if the clicked through to the detail URI.
The downside would be that we'd need to boil the issue down to a slug and sentence or two, and that might lead to some tension about how much detail to include.

#### Non-PromQL filters

Teaching the CVO to query the local Thanos/Prometheus shouldn't be too bad (openshift/origin already does this).

> But to simplify things out of the gate, we may want to use `platform` or something that has less granularity, but simpler execution (the CVO would pull the Infrastructure resource and compare with the configured `platform` to decide if the edge was recommended).

Author: yeah, that would work too.  Not sure if there's a canned syntax we could pull off the shelf?  Would we use something structured like [`ObjectReference`][1] and then... JSONPath for `key`?

[1]: but you could do the same thing with metrics/PromQL in cluster, so it's mostly a convenience for graph-data admins

> But to simplify things out of the gate, we may want to use `platform` or something that has less granularity, but simpler execution (the CVO would pull the Infrastructure resource and compare with the configured `platform` to decide if the edge was recommended).

Reviewer 8: Arbitrary fields might have non-string types. Would we limit the comparisons to string matching and convert non-strings to strings, or do something more complicated?

Worth doing this in 1.1.0, and extending to PromQL in a backwards-compatible 1.2.0?

#### Reporting recommendation freshness

Currently [`availableUpdates`][api-availableUpdates] does not have a way to declare the freshness of its contents (e.g. "based on data retrieved from the upstream update service at `$TIMESTAMP`").
We do set the `RetrievedUpdates` condition and eventually alert if there are problems retrieving updates, and the expectation is that if we aren't complaining about being stale, we're fresh enough.
We could take the same approach with `conditionalUpdates`, but now that we also have "based on evaluations of the in-cluster state at `$TIMESTAMP`" in the mix, we may want to proactively declare the time.
On the other hand, continually bumping something that's similar to the node's `lastHeartbeatTime` is a bunch of busywork for both the cluster-version operator and the API-server.

> Is the added transparency worth it?

Reviewer 2: We could worry only about freshness of the graph from the update service, silently re-evaluate on some reasonable schedule, but then also re-evaluate on a spec change and if there's a diff between the two evaluations on the relevant edge throw an error about resource being out of date? I've often thought that we should force a refresh on spec change even with current implementation.

Author: refresh on spec change, withholding the `observedGeneration` until the refresh is complete... Hmm... if we refresh everything from the update-service poll through to the condition evaluations for any conditional edges, that could take a while.  I think the current behavior is based on the expectation that both the update service metadata and the relevant in-cluster configurations are slowly-changing, on the order of hours, vs. our poll periods, on the order of minutes.  We can see how long the full refresh takes, and then decide if we want to gate `spec` change acceptance on that whole cycle.

## Alternatives

### Additional data sources

The update service could switch on data scraped from Insights tarballs or other sources instead of Prometheus.
And we could extend `clusters` in future work to allow for that.
With this initial enhancement, I focused on Prometheus because it already exposes an API and provides access to lots of in-cluster data via a single [PromQL][] query string.

#### Update-service-side filtering

Instead of filtering cluster-side in the cluster-version operator, we could filter edges on the update-service side by querying [uploaded Telemetry][uploaded-telemetry] or [client-provided query parameters][cincinnati-for-openshift-request].
However, there is more data available in-cluster beyond what is uploaded as Telemetry.
And because we are [supporting edges which we do not recommend][openshift-docs-32091], we'd need to pass the reasons for not recommending those edges out to clusters anyway.

> Passing enough information to make the decision completely on the cluster side is not that much more work.

Reviewer 2: In on-prem OSUS scenarios they'd need a telemetry sink and Prometheus service to poll, does such exist via OSUS today?

Author: not having a local Telemetry target makes the service-side PromQL filtering (#427) more difficult, but service-side filtering based on client-provided query parameters (#737) would work fine.  But for me, the main reason to shift to cluster-side processing is that the conditional edges are still supported, regardless of whether they are recommended, so the viability of service-side filtering seems somewhat academic.

Reviewer 8: Doing the evaluation on the cluster also makes it possible to have it work for disconnected environments.

// +k8s:deepcopy-gen=true
type ConditionalUpdate struct {
	// release is the target of the update.
	// +required
	release Release `json:"release"`

	// url contains information about this release. This URL is set by
	// the 'url' metadata property on a release or the metadata returned by
	// the update API and should be displayed as a link in user
	// interfaces. The URL field may not be set for test or nightly
	// releases.
	// +optional
	URL URL `json:"url,omitempty"`

	// FIXME: [also reason/message?](#metadata-to-include-when-blocking-a-conditional-request)

	// conditions represents the observations of the conditional update's
	// current status. Known types are:
	// * Recommended, for whether the update is recommended for the current cluster.
	// +patchMergeKey=type
	// +patchStrategy=merge
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=type
	Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty" patchStrategy:"merge" patchMergeKey:"type" protobuf:"bytes,1,rep,name=conditions"`
}
```

[ClusterVersion's `status.history` entries][api-history] will be extended with the following property:

```go
// overrides records update guards which were overriden to initiate the update.

> Overrides []string `json:"overrides,omitempty"`  FIXME: or maybe just a single string?  These will be populated via Go errors; not sure how structured we want this to be.

Reviewer 7: Is this intended to contain any reason an admin used `force`, e.g. overrode a pending resource deletion, or just that one or more of these newly added conditions has been overridden? I think it should be the former, and the comment leads me to believe that as well, but it needs clarification either way.

The operator will grow a new `warning`-level `CannotEvaluateConditionalUpdates` alert that fires if `lastTransitionTime` for any `Recommended=Unknown` condition is over an hour old.

Any `conditionalUpdates` with `Recommended=True` will have its release inserted into `availableUpdates`.

Both `availableUpdates` and `conditionalUpdates` should be sorted in decreasing SemVer order for stability, to avoid unnecessary status churn.

### Update client support for the enhanced schema

[The web-console][web-console] and [`oc`][oc] both consume ClusterVersion to present clients with a list of available updates.
With this enhancement, they will both be extended to consume [`conditionalUpdates`](#enhanced-clusterversion-representation).
When listing recommended updates, clients will list the contents of `availableUpdates`.
When listing all supported updates, clients will additionally include entries from `conditionalUpdates` with `Recommended!=True`, and include the `reason` and `message` from the `Recommended` condition alongside the supported-but-not-recommended updates.
Clients may optionally provision for reporting additional condition types, in case new types are added in the future.

> ### User Stories

Reviewer 7: We (engineering or at least the OTA team) should start being consistent here. If we're not going to structure these and present them as true `user stories` then we should just give the section a more descriptive heading and leave `User Stories` empty, N/A or whatever. I got dinged on this in one my enhancements but my motivation is also that I agree that user stories should include user stores.

Reviewer 2: I think this is a good observation.

- As a cincinatti-graph-data maintainer I need a method to express targetted edge blocks, so that I can allow clusters unaffected by well scoped bugs to continue receiving the latest features or bug-fixes while protecting those clusters which would be affected by the defect (This is particularly useful during the time immediately after GA where there's tension between blocking all minor version upgrades due to issues that can be scoped to a subset of clusters.)
- As an admin of a cluster unaffected by a targetted edge block I want to upgrade as I always have
- As an admin of a cluster which has matched the criteria for a targetted edge block I do not want to update to the affected version without confirmation
- As an admin of a cluster which has matched the criteria for one or more targetted edges I want to review those upgrades and the match criteria
- As an admin of a cluster which matches targetted edge block criteria I want to upgrade to an affected version with an override specific to targetted edge blocks
- As a support engineer I want the clusterversion history to note the evaluated status of all matching criteria whenever an upgrade to a version with targetted edge blocks was taken, so that I know either the CVO did not match any criteria or the admin override the CVO.

Author: Ok, I've pushed 73569bc -> e417d99 to move all of the worked examples into the user stories section.  Hopefully that addresses this general point?  I'll optimistically mark this resolved, but feel free to re-open or add more specific comments if it's missing something.

    clusters:
      platform: VSphere  # FIXME: Or PromQL, to cover the None-but-actually-vSphere underneath case?
    ```

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Stranding supported clusters

As described [in the documentation][support-documentation], supported updates are still supported even if incoming edges are blocked, and Red Hat will eventually provide supported update paths from any supported release to the latest supported release in its z-stream.
There is a risk, with the dynamic, per-cluster graph, that targeted edge blocking removes all outgoing update recommendations for some clusters on supported releases.
This risk can be mitigated in at least two ways:

* For the fraction of customer clusters that do not [opt-out of submitting Insights/Telemetry][uploaded-telemetry-opt-out], we can monitor [the existing `cluster_version_available_updates`][uploaded-telemetry-cluster_version_available_updates] to check for clusters running older versions which are still reporting no available, recommended updates.

* We can process the graph with tooling that removes all `conditionalEdges` and look for any supported versions without exit paths.

#### Malicious conditions

> An attacker who compromises a cluster's [`upstream`][api-upstream] update service can already to some fairly disruptive things, like recommend updates from 4.1.0 straight to 4.8.0.

Reviewer 7: > can already to some fairly 

can already **_do_** some fairly

* `from` (required, [string][json-string]), with the `version` of the starting node.
* `to` (required, [string][json-string]), with the `version` of the ending node.
* `qualifiers` (optional, [array][json-array], with qualifications around the recommendation.
  Each entry is an [object][json-object] with the following schema:
  * `url` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a URI documenting the issue, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
  * FIXME: [also reason/message?](#metadata-to-include-when-blocking-a-conditional-request)
  * `clusters` (optional, [object][json-object]).
    If any `clusters` property matches a given cluster, the edge is not recommended for that cluster, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
    If `clusters` is unset, the edge is blocked for all clusters.
    * `promql` (optional, [object][json-object]), defining the subset of affected clusters, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).

>     * FIXME: [`platform` or other properties that are easier to evaluate than PromQL?](#non-promql-filters)

Author: I've decided to punt `platform` to future work.

For each edge declared by a release image (primary metadata), the graph-builder will check the blocker cache for matching blocks.
Edges with no matching blocks are unconditionally recommended, and will be included in `edges`.
Edges with matching blocks are conditionally recommended, and will be included in `conditionalEdges`.

### Cluster-version operator support for the enhanced schema

The cluster-version operator will learn to parse [`conditionalEdges`](#enhanced-cincinnati-json-representation) into [`conditionalUpdates`](#enhanced-clusterversion-representation).
`edges` will continue to go straight into `availableUpdates`.
The operator will log an error if the same target is included in both `edges` and `conditionalEdges`, but will prefer the `conditionalEdges` entry in that case.

Additionally, the operator will continually re-evaluate the blocking conditionals in `conditionalUpdates` and update `conditionalUpdates[].conditions` accordingly.
The timing of the evaluation and fresheness are largely internal details.
The operator can periodically poll, or use edge triggered watches, combinations of watching and polling, etc.

> To perform the PromQL request, the operator will FIXME: details about connecting to the local Thanos/Prometheus.

Author: This is the last FIXME.  I'm not too worried about working this out, so I've removed the WIP from the PR.  I'll keep poking at this, but I don't mind if the PR lands in the meantime and we flesh these details out post-merge.

Reviewer 2: I agree, implementation detail we can figure out when we get there. We believe there are existing examples in the product already that we can leverage.

Reviewer 5: I do not think we need to figure this out before landing the PR. We can definitely come back and update the PR once we figure that in the future.

Reviewer 2: Let's get rid of this fixme then.

  * `blockedClusters` (optional, [object][json-object]).
    If any `blockedClusters` property matches a given cluster, the edge is not recommended for that cluster, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
    If `blockedClusters` is unset, the edge is blocked for all clusters.
    * `promql` (optional, [string][json-string]), defining the subset of affected clusters, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).

### Enhanced ClusterVersion representation

[The ClusterVersion `status`][api-cluster-version-status] will be extended with a new `conditionalUpdates` property:

```go
// conditionalUpdates contains the list of updates that may be
// conditionally recommended for this cluster. Consumers interested
// in the set of updates that are actually recommended for this
// cluster should use availableUpdates. This list may be empty if no
// updates are recommended, if the update service is unavailable, or

> // if an empty or invalid channel has been specified.

Author: Done in 8ad13c2 -> 66999b1

---
title: targeted-update-edge-blocking
authors:
  - "@wking"
reviewers:
  - "@bparees"
  - "@dhellmann"
  - "@jan-f"
  - "@jottofar"
  - "@LalatenduMohanty"
  - "@sdodson"

>   - "@vrutkovs"

Author: @deads2k, I've added you with 0add9f4 -> a475279.

* Exactly scoping the set of blocked clusters to those which would have been impacted by the issue.
    For example, some issues may be races where the impacted cluster set is a random subset of the vulnerable cluster set.
    Any targeting of the blocked edges will reduce the number of blocked clusters which would have not been impacted, and thus reduce the contention between protecting vulnerable clusters and inconveniencing invulnerable clusters, so even overly broad scoping is better than no scoping at all.
* Specifying a particular update service implementation.
    This enhancement floats some ideas, but the details of the chosen approach are up to each update service's maintainers.

## Proposal

### Enhanced graph-data schema for blocking edges

[The existing blocked-edges schema][block-edges] will be extended with the following new properties:

* `url` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a URI documenting the blocking reason.
    For example, this could link to a bug's impact statement or knowledge-base article.
* `reason` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a CamelCase reason suitable for [a `ClusterOperatorStatusCondition` `reason` property][api-reason].

> * `message` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a human-oriented message describing the blocking reason, suitable for [a `ClusterOperatorStatusCondition` `message` property][api-message].

Author: I've pushed 43c3354 -> 0add9f4, extending the *Test Plan* and *Metadata to include when blocking a conditional request* subsections to explain the `optional` choice and also to add a formal policy that we require these in our own graph-data.

> * `message` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a human-oriented message describing the blocking reason, suitable for [a `ClusterOperatorStatusCondition` `message` property][api-message].

Reviewer 2: I believe this is being done to allow flexibility in the API which out specific implementation may choose not to exercise and in order to avoid a major version bump in the API?

> * `message` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a human-oriented message describing the blocking reason, suitable for [a `ClusterOperatorStatusCondition` `message` property][api-message].

Reviewer 8: OK

* `clusters` (optional, [object][json-object]), defining the subset of clusters for which the block applies.
  If any `clusters` property matches a given cluster, the edge should be blocked for that cluster.
  If `clusters` is unset or empty, the edge is blocked for all clusters.
  * `promql` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a [PromQL][] query describing affected clusters.
    This query will be evaluated on the local cluster, so it has access to data beyond the subset that is [uploaded to Telemetry][uploaded-telemetry].
    The query should return a 0 if the update should be allowed and a 1 if the update should be blocked.

[The schema version][graph-data-schema-version] would also be bumped to 1.1.0, because this is a backwards-compatible change.
Consumers who only understand graph-data schema 1.0.0 would ignore the `clusters` property and block the edge for all clusters.
The alternative of failing open is discussed [here](#failing-open).

> Note that graph-data does not include a positive `edges` schema.

Author: This was an attempt to provide context to head off further wonders [like][1]:

> why did we decide this belongs in the "blocked edges" schema and not the "edges" schema?...

But sure, I can shift this down to an alternatives section...

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/821#discussion_r665635966

> Note that graph-data does not include a positive `edges` schema.

Author: 8ad13c2 -> 66999b1

If the Prometheus implementation is not sufficiently hardened, malicious PromQL might expose the cluster to the attacker, with the simplest attacks being computationally intensive queries which cost CPU and memory resources that the administrator would rather be spending on more important tasks.
[Future monitoring improvements][mon-1772] might reduce the risk of expensive queries.
And it's also possible to teach the cluster-version operator to reject PromQL that does not match expected patterns.

#### Clusters without local Prometheus stacks

The Prometheus and monitoring stacks are fairly resource-intensive.
There are [open proposals][mon-1569] to reduce their resource requirements.
It is possible that some future clusters decide they need to drop the Prometheus stack entirely, which would leave the CVO unable to evaluate conditions based on PromQL.
A future mitigation would be extending to support [non-PromQL filters](#non-promql-filters).

## Design Details

### Test Plan

[The graph-data repository][graph-data] should grow a presubmit test to enforce as much of the new schema as is practical.

> Validating any PromQL beyond "it's a string" is probably more trouble than its worth, but we should keep an eye on Telemetry to see if any deployed cluster-version operators are reporting trouble with condition evaluation.

Reviewer 8: It seems like we're much more likely to have some sort of expression typo than to ask for the wrong field entirely. Could we reuse the parser in Prometheus so we can be sure the strings at least parse to a valid PromQL expression?

Author: I've pushed 07db299 -> 6330580,  committing to getting graph-data's PromQL in front of the Go PromQL parser in a graph-data presubmit.  A new *Alternatives* subsection discusses the tradeoffs.  I'm not all that picky about how this gets implemented, maybe we can be clever and somehow avoid vendoring a bunch of Go in graph-data.  Maybe it's not worth the trouble of being clever.  Maybe it wouldn't actually require all that much vendored code.  I don't think the risk here is high enough to need to bottom all of this out before landing the enhancement.

Older update services consuming newer graph-data will know that they are missing some features unique to 1.1.0, but that they will still get something reasonable out of the data by using their 1.0.0 parser (they'll just consider all conditional edges to be complete blockers).

Newer clients talking to older update services will not receive any `conditionalEdges`, but they will understand all the data that the update service sends to them.
Older clients talking to newer update services will not notice `conditionalEdges`, so those edges will continue to be unconditionally blocked for those clients.

Newer clients consuming older ClusterVersion will not receive any `conditionalUpdates`, but they will understand all the data included in the ClusterVersion object (e.g. `availableUpdates`).
Older clients consuming newer ClusterVersion will not notice `conditionalUpdaets`, so those edges will continue to be unconditionally blocked for those clients.

## Implementation History

Major milestones in the life cycle of a proposal should be tracked in `Implementation

> History.

Reviewer 8: nit: There's a missing quote here that throws of the markdown parser.

Author: Thanks; fixed in de88e18 -> 43c3354.

#### Update-service-side filtering

Instead of filtering cluster-side in the cluster-version operator, we could filter edges on the update-service side by querying [uploaded Telemetry][uploaded-telemetry] or [client-provided query parameters][cincinnati-for-openshift-request].
However, there is more data available in-cluster beyond what is uploaded as Telemetry.
And because we are [supporting edges which we do not recommend][openshift-docs-32091], we'd need to pass the reasons for not recommending those edges out to clusters anyway.
Passing enough information to make the decision completely on the cluster side is not that much more work.

Also in this space is clusters which are on restricted networks.
Those clusters could be reconfigured to ship their Telemetry or Insights uploads to local aggregators, or could have their Telemetry and Insights sneakernetted to Red Hat's central aggregators.
But client side filtering will work in restricted-network clusters without the need for any of that, especially now that [the OpenShift Update Service][osus] is making it easier to get Cincinnati responses to clusters in restricted networks.

### Failing open

> Whether a conditional edge should be recommended for a given cluster depends on intent flowin from the graph-data maintainers, through update services, to the cluster version operator, and then being evaluated in-cluster.

Reviewer 8: typo

```suggestion
Whether a conditional edge should be recommended for a given cluster depends on intent flowing from the graph-data maintainers, through update services, to the cluster version operator, and then being evaluated in-cluster.
```

Author: Thanks; fixed in 02d2825 -> de88e18.

  Each entry is an [object][json-object] with the following schema:
  * `url` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a URI documenting the issue, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
  * `reason` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a CamelCase reason, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
  * `message` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a human-oriented message describing the blocking reason, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
  * `blockedClusters` (optional, [object][json-object]).
    If any `blockedClusters` property matches a given cluster, the edge is not recommended for that cluster, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
    If `blockedClusters` is unset, the edge is blocked for all clusters.
    * `promql` (optional, [string][json-string]), defining the subset of affected clusters, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).

> ### Enhanced ClusterVersion representation

Author: @deads2k has been taking a look, and I've listed him as a reviewer in the enhancement file, so I'll mark this call for a reviewer resolved.

[The ClusterVersion `status`][api-cluster-version-status] will be extended with a new `conditionalUpdates` property:

```go
// conditionalUpdates contains the list of updates that may be
// conditionally recommended for this cluster. Consumers interested
// in the set of updates that are actually recommended for this
// cluster should use availableUpdates. This list may be empty if no
// updates are recommended, if the update service is unavailable, or
// if an empty or invalid channel has been specified.
// +optional
conditionalUpdates []ConditionalUpdate `json:"conditionalUpdates,omitempty"`
```

The `availableUpdates` documentation will be adjusted to read:

```go
// availableUpdates contains the subset of conditionalUpdates that
// apply to this cluster.  Updates which appear in conditionalUpdates
// but not in availableUpdates may expose this cluster to known
// issues.
```

> The new ConditionalUpdate type will have the following schema:

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with it as is. Is this a sticking point for you @deads2k ?

> The new ConditionalUpdate type will have the following schema:

Reviewer: > I'm fine with it as is. Is this a sticking point for you @deads2k ?

It is not a sticking point.

```go
// ConditionalUpdate represents an update which is recommended to some
// clusters on the version the current cluster is reconciling, but which
// may not be recommended for the current cluster.
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen=true
type ConditionalUpdate struct {
	// release is the target of the update.
	// +required
	release Release `json:"release"`

> 	// blockedClusters represents the subset of clusters for which the conditional update is not recommended.

Author: Let's fold this into [this other thread][1] about what to name this property.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/821#discussion_r698763302

	// +required

> 	BlockedClusters []ConditionalUpdateBlocker `json:"blockedClusters"`

Reviewer: RiskCriteria

> 	BlockedClusters []ConditionalUpdateBlocker `json:"blockedClusters"`

Author: 6330580 -> 32fb747 pivots to `when` for this array/slice.  And it defines cluster-condition types that can be happy or sad, which hopefully makes it easy to extend and also to recycle for #837 and similar.  Better?

> 	BlockedClusters []ConditionalUpdateBlocker `json:"blockedClusters"`

Author: `when` was not popular either.  I've moved to `matchingRules` in 32fb747 -> e237b6f at @sdodson's suggestion.

	// conditions represents the observations of the conditional update's
	// current status. Known types are:
	// * Recommended, for whether the update is recommended for the current cluster.
	// +patchMergeKey=type
	// +patchStrategy=merge
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=type

> 	Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty" patchStrategy:"merge" patchMergeKey:"type" protobuf:"bytes,1,rep,name=conditions"`

Reviewer: RiskAssessment?

Author: Are the pros and cons of using `conditions` vs. dedicated properties laid out somewhere?  I liked it here because it sounded status-y, and helped distinguish between the CVO-inputs slurped out of the Cincinnati JSON and the CVO's own take on those inputs.  But I'd be fine using `recommended` or some such instead.  Or even `status`, if we feel fairly confident that the only thing the CVO will want to express about these conditional update targets is their recommended-ness.

Reviewer 4: i'm also not clear on @deads2k point about multiplicity + oc wait.  can you clarify?

fundamentally i don't have a strong or informed opinion here, just trying to help @wking move forward.

Author: I've pushed 0305150 -> af6d5bb, keeping `conditions` and adding a new `Evaluating` condition, to allow folks to distinguish "CVO is working on it" from "CVO won't even try".  You could get at similar information implicitly by looking at whether or not the CVO had pushed a `Recommended` condition, but the `Evaluating` condition makes this explicit.

I think that addresses this thread, so I'll mark it resolved, but feel free to re-open if I'm misunderstanding the ask.

}
```

The new ConditionalUpdateBlocker type will have the following schema:

```go
// ConditionalUpdateBlocker represents a reason and cluster-set for
// blocking a conditional update.
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen=true

> type ConditionalUpdateBlocker struct {

Reviewer: RiskAssessment?  RiskCriteria?

Author: Let's fold this discussion into [this existing thread][1] about the consuming property name.  It doesn't seem likely that we will want a value-type structure name that wildly diverges from the consuming property name.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/821#discussion_r698763302

	// url contains information about this release. This URL is set by
	// the 'url' metadata property on a release or the metadata returned by
	// the update API and should be displayed as a link in user
	// interfaces. The URL field may not be set for test or nightly
	// releases.
	// +optional
	URL URL `json:"url,omitempty"`

	// reason is the CamelCase reason for the condition's current status.
	// +optional
	Reason string `json:"reason,omitempty"`

	// message provides additional information about the current condition.
	// This is only to be consumed by humans. It may contain Line Feed
	// characters (U+000A), which should be rendered as new lines.
	// +optional
	Message string `json:"message,omitempty"`

	// promQL is a PromQL query describing affected clusters. The query
	// should return a 0 if the update should be allowed and a 1 if the
	// update should be blocked.
	// +optional

> 	PromQL string `json:"promQL,omitempty"`

Reviewer: if I wanted to restrict on other criteria in the future (or even now), having this be a discriminated union could have value.  Platform is clear (you can select this in promql), but restricting based on "this is configured in your cluster" looks valuable.

Reviewer 4: my concern w/ an api like that is we need to decide up front that we will only ever want to set one of those fields at a time for a given edge (vs wanting to AND or OR the fields together to make a decision about recommendation).

Reviewer 8: That's fair; at some point we would risk creating our own expression language. Although we might need to, for those cases where prometheus isn't present, and in that case I would expect the `Type` to be the name of that language and for the expression to go into the `Query` field.

Author: Ok, 6330580 -> 32fb747 pivots to:

```yaml
when:
- type: promql
  promql: |
    0 * cluster_infrastructure_provider{type=~"VSphere|None"}
    or
    cluster_infrastructure_provider
- type: platform
  sadPlatforms:
  - VSphere
  - None
```

which should be the "discriminated union" pattern discussed above.  There's a bunch of hoop-jumping  to work around golang/go#6213; let me know if folks prefer a different approach to that, like:

```yaml
when:
- type: promql
  properties:
    promql: ...

Additionally, the operator will continually re-evaluate the blocking conditionals in `conditionalUpdates` and update `conditionalUpdates[].conditions` accordingly.
The timing of the evaluation and fresheness are largely internal details.
The operator can periodically poll, or use edge triggered watches, combinations of watching and polling, etc.

To perform the PromQL request, the operator will FIXME: details about connecting to the local Thanos/Prometheus.

If there are issues evaluating a conditional update, the operator will set the `Unknown` status on the `Recommended` condition.
The operator will grow a new `warning`-level `CannotEvaluateConditionalUpdates` alert that fires if `lastTransitionTime` for any `Recommended=Unknown` condition is over an hour old.

Any `conditionalUpdates` with `Recommended=True` will have its release inserted into `availableUpdates`.

Both `availableUpdates` and `conditionalUpdates` should be sorted in decreasing SemVer order for stability, to avoid unnecessary status churn.

The cluster version operator does not currently gate update acceptance on whether the requested target release is a recommended update.

> With this enhancement, the CVO will add non-blocking gates.

Author: The logic will live next to where we currently have some conditionally-blocking gates.  So I'm fine with "non-blocking gates" for this, but am open to alternative wording for checks that can fail, won't block updates, but will get entered into the history.  "Turnstiles"?  "History-complaint rules"?

> With this enhancement, the CVO will add non-blocking gates.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With this enhancement, the CVO will add a historical audit trail that records when non-recommended updates are applied"
```

> With this enhancement, the CVO will add non-blocking gates.

Author: I used `gate` for this idea in a few places, so I needed more touches than that^ diff.  But I've pushed 3c5ce31 -> 11377b3 to pivot from "gates" to "complaints" wording.  I think that addresses your concerns, so I'll mark this thread resolved, but feel free to re-open or file new comments if I'm missing something, or you don't like "complaints".

Update targets that are not currently recommended, or are not supported at all, will be allowed without any ClusterVersion overrides ([`force`][api-force] or a similar, new property).
But update targets that are not currently recommended will result in entries in [the `overrides` history entries](#enhanced-clusterversion-representation).

### Update client support for the enhanced schema

[The web-console][web-console] and [`oc`][oc] both consume ClusterVersion to present clients with a list of available updates.

> With this enhancement, they will both be extended to consume [`conditionalUpdates`](#enhanced-clusterversion-representation).

Author: I've pushed a475279 -> ea5f004, shuffling to make it more clear that the `availableUpdates` handling is not changing with this enhancement.  And I've replaced "will both be extended" with "may both be extended" for the new `conditionalUpdates` handling.

When listing recommended updates, clients will list the contents of `availableUpdates`.

> When listing all supported updates, clients will additionally include entries from `conditionalUpdates` with `Recommended!=True`, and include the `reason` and `message` from the `Recommended` condition alongside the supported-but-not-recommended updates (if this output is too verbose, clients may want to hide it behind an option like `--include-not-recommended`).

Author: We'e had a reference to the docs for a while now:

```console
$ git show | grep -A1 Note
+Note: as described [in the documentation][support-documentation], supported updates are still supported even if incoming edges are blocked, and Red Hat will eventually provide supported update paths from any supported release to the latest supported release in its z-stream.
+And, since [docs#32091][openshift-docs-32091], [that documentation][support-documentation] also points out that updates initiated after the update recommendation has been removed are still supported.
```

And I've just pushed 66999b1 -> 0f8c314, adding a new *Comparison with tombstones* subsection under *User Stories* to talk through @sdodson's points above.

Clients may optionally provision for reporting additional condition types, in case new types are added in the future.

The set of supported-but-not-recommended updates is pretty verbose.

> The `oc` folks would probably want to hide it behind a flag like `--include-not-recommended`.

Author: I've made `--include-not-recommended` required with 0f8c314 -> 7220dee.

> Updating to a conditional edge that the cluster does not qualify for may reqire `--allow-not-recommended` or similar client-side gate.

Author: I've made `--allow-not-recommended` required with 0f8c314 -> 7220dee.

          "blockedClusters": {
            "promql": "cluster_infrastructure_provider{type=~\"VSphere|None\"}\nor\n0 * cluster_infrastructure_provider"
          }
        }
      ]
    },
    ...
  ],
  "edges": [...],
  "nodes": [...],
}
```

#### ClusterVersion representation

The CVO on a vSphere HW 14 cluster with a proxy configured would consume the above Cincinnati JSON, and populate ClusterVersion like:

```yaml
...
status:
  availableUpdates:
  - version: 4.6.43
    image: quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:2b8efb25c1c9d7a713ae74b8918457280f9cc0c66d475e78d3676810d568b534
    url: https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2021:3197
    channels: ...
  - version: 4.6.42
    image: quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:59e2e85f5d1bcb4440765c310b6261387ffc3f16ed55ca0a79012367e15b558b
    url: https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2021:3008
    channels: ...
  conditionalUpdates:
  ...
  - release:
    - version: 4.7.4
      image: quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:999a6a4bd731075e389ae601b373194c6cb2c7b4dadd1ad06ef607e86476b129
      url: https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2021:3008
      channels: ...

>     blockedClusters:

Author: Let's fold this into [this other thread][1] about what to name this property.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/821#discussion_r698763302

    vSphere clusters leveraging the vSphere cloud provider may lose node names which can have serious impacts on the stability of the control plane and workloads. https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1942207#c3

    On clusters with a Proxy configured, the authentication operator may keep many oauth-server connections open, resulting in high memory consumption by the authentication operator and router pods. https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1941840#c33

  Version: 4.6.99-example
  Image: quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@...
  Recommended: Unknown
  Reason: PromQLError
  Message: Unable to evaluate PromQL to determine if the cluster is impacted by ExampleReason. https://example.com/ExampleReason

  Version: 4.6.30
  Image: quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:476588ee99a28f39410372175925672e9a37f0cd1272e17ed2454d7f5cafff90
  Recommended: False
  Reason: ThanosDNSUnmarshalError
  Message: The monitoring operator goes Degraded=True when the user monitoring workflow is enabled due to DNS changes. https://access.redhat.com/solutions/6092191

>   ...other conditional-and-not-allowed-for-this-cluster and conditional-but-could-not-evaluate..

Author: I've pushed 7220dee -> e9933b8 to add Scott's language to the `oc` example.  But the wording I added to the generic client section is:

> When `Recommended!=True` entries exist but the `--include-not-recommended` opt-in guard is not listed, clients may inform users about the existence of the guard.

which allows clients to not point out the opt-in guard if they don't want to.  I'm personally not strongly opinionated about how convenient it should be to discover and opt into this dangerous stuff.  The fact that `--help` will discuss the options is enough for me.  So I'll mark this thread resolved, but feel free to re-open or start a new one if folks feel like we want to box clients in more tightly around a given implementation.

Older clients consuming newer ClusterVersion will not notice `conditionalUpdaets`, so those edges will continue to be unconditionally blocked for those clients.

## Implementation History

Major milestones in the life cycle of a proposal should be tracked in `Implementation
History.

## Drawbacks

Dynamic edge status that is dependent on cluster state makes [the graph-data repository][graph-data] a less authoritative view of the graph served to a given client at a given time, as discussed in [the *risks and mititgations* section](#risks-and-mitigations).
This is mitigated by ClusterVersion's [`status.history[].overrides'](#enhanced-clusterversion-representation), which records any cluster-version operator objections which the cluster administrator chose to override.
It is possible that cluster administrators would chose to clear that data, but it seems unlikely that they would invest significant effort in trying to cover their tracks when [the edges are supported regardless of whether they were recommended][openshift-docs-32091].

## Alternatives

> ### Additional data sources

Reviewer 4: there are a mix of heading levels in this section that don't seem intentional

Author: Oops.  Fixed with e9933b8 -> 6f093a0 to use `###` for all *Alternatives* subsections.

Or the cluster-version operator may have trouble connecting to the in-cluster Thanos/Prometheues.
In those situations, this enhancement proposal recommends blocking the edge.

An alternative approach would have been failing open, where "failed to evaluate the graph-data maintainer intentions" would result in recommending edges.
That would reduce the risk of leaving a cluster stuck without any recommended updates.
But evalution failures should trigger alerts, so the appropriate administrators can resolve the issue, and delaying an update until we can make a clear determination is safer than updating while we are unable to make a clear determination.

As a final safety valve for situations where recovering evaluation capability would take too long, confident cluster administrators can force through the update guard.

### Query coverage

[The `promql` proposal](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges) specifies a single query that allows the update service to distinguish clusters where the edge is recommended (the query returns 0) from clusters where the edge is not recommended (the query returns 1).

> This allows the cluster-version operator to distinquish between the three states of `Recommended=True` (0), `Recommended=False` (1), or `Recommended=Unknonwn` (no result, for example because the query asked for metrics which the local Prometheus was failing to scrape).

Reviewer 4: not clear to me how this is an alternative, it sounds like it's just describing the proposal

Reviewer 8: Yes, I think I would move this paragraph up to the risks section since it explains the mitigation for any query failure.

Author: In one of the earlier PRs in this effort, there was some pushback about why the queries had to be complicated enough to return 1 or 0.  This alternatives section is my attempt to explain why that complication is worth the trouble.  I've added a comparison to a simpler `promql: cluster_infrastructure_provider{type=~"VSphere|None"}` alternative to this subsection with 6f093a0 -> 02d2825, and kept it in the alternatives section.  The risk section already includes a *Clusters without local Prometheus stacks* subsection, and I've added a paragraph there linking over to the alternatives subsection as related content.

* Specifying a particular update service implementation.
    This enhancement floats some ideas, but the details of the chosen approach are up to each update service's maintainers.

## Proposal

### Enhanced graph-data schema for blocking edges

[The existing blocked-edges schema][block-edges] will be extended with the following new properties:

* `url` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a URI documenting the blocking reason.
    For example, this could link to a bug's impact statement or knowledge-base article.
* `reason` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a CamelCase reason suitable for [a `ClusterOperatorStatusCondition` `reason` property][api-reason].
* `message` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a human-oriented message describing the blocking reason, suitable for [a `ClusterOperatorStatusCondition` `message` property][api-message].
* `matchingRules` (optional, [array][json-array]), defining conditions for deciding which clusters have the update recommended and which do not.
  The array is ordered by decreasing precedence.
  Consumers should walk the array in order, and stop after the first rule they can successfully evaluate.

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Reviewer 8: This description doesn't match what I remember from slack, either. I thought we were going for logical OR semantics? So, it's not "stop after the first rule they can successfully evaluate". It's "stop if a rule results in a True response" because at that point we know the cluster matches and we should not recommend the update, so we don't need to check any of the other rules.

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Author: > if at least one rule evaluates to "True", is the edge recommended or not?
> if at least one rule evaluates to "False", is the edge recommended or not?
> ...

The reason we have precedence and exit early is because you could have different precision with different cluster-condition types.  For example, consider a bug on vSphere-based clusters with `http(s)Proxy` configured (manufacturing a complicated case).  We can express that exactly with the `promql` type, but with some false-positives with the (future, hypothetical) `platform` type:

```yaml
matchingRules:
- type: promql
  promql: |
    1 - group(cluster_infrastructure_provider{type=~"VSphere|None"}) * max(cluster_proxy_enabled{type=~"https?"})
    or
    group(cluster_infrastructure_provider) * group(cluster_proxy_enabled)
- type: platform
  sadPlatforms:
  - VSphere
  - None
```

Breaking down the possibilities:

* Cluster is vSphere with `httpsProxy`, CVO can evaluate the `promql` rule, `Recommended=False`.
* Cluster is vSphere with `httpsProxy`, CVO cannot evaluate the `promql` rule, but can evaluate the `platform` rule, `Recommended=False`.
* Cluster is vSphere with no Proxy config, CVO can evaluate the `promql` rule, `Recommended=True`.
* Cluster is vSphere with no Proxy config, CVO cannot evaluate the `promql` rule, but can evaluate the `platform` rule, `Recommended=False` (false-positive).

> It's "stop if a rule results in a True response" because at that point we know the cluster matches and we should not recommend the update...

If one rule is sad, that's sufficient to ignore later, less-precise rules.  But if one rule is happy, that's also sufficient to ignore later, less-precise rules.  Because if you had the same cluster state, and the CVO for some reason could not evaluate the the later rule type, it would be recommending the update.  So we cannot ship any rules that would give a false-negative and appear to evaluate happy despite the cluster actually being at risk.

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Reviewer 4: so:

1) walk down the rules in order
2) as soon as you hit a rule that evaluates to 1, block the edge, you're done.
3) as soon as you hit a rule that evaluates to 0, allow the edge, you're done.
4) as soon as you hit a rule you can't evaluate, block the edge, you're done.

is that it?

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Author: > 0. if there are no rules defined, block the edge (this is the api compatibility case)

And also the "we're blocking this edge for everyone, but want to use `url`, `reason`, and `message` to explain why" case.  Where we currently use text-only erratas to get that information out.

> 2. if you hit a rule that evaluates to 0, keep processing rules

Nope, I'd just stop here, and say "rule happy, so `Recommended=True`".  And doesn't the *In which case, the cluster-version operator would* bit down in the *Non-PromQL filters* section make this clear?  Maybe the issue is my language here, where "can successfully evaluate" means "happy or sad" (not just "happy") and distinguishes from the "unknown/cannot-eval" case?

> 3. as soon as you hit a rule that evaluates to 1, block the edge, you're done.

Yes to this one.

> 4. as soon as you hit a rule you can't evaluate, block the edge, you're done.

Nope, if you can't evaluate, you continue to later rules, to see if you can evaluate those.

> 5. if you get to the end and didn't block the edge, allow the edge.

Nope.  If you have a happy result, you immediately `Recommended=True`, without attempting later rules.  If you have a sad result, you immediately `Recommended=False`, without attempting later rules.  If you hit an unknown result while walking the rule set, you are `Recommended=Unknown`.  If there are no rules in `matchingRules` at all, you are `Recommended=False`.

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Reviewer 2: I think the part that may be missing is possible values and what happens with the update recommendation based upon those values on line 75. This is confused because we do explain what the recommendation state is when all rules fail to evaluate on line 76.

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Reviewer 4: >>        as soon as you hit a rule that evaluates to 1, block the edge, you're done.
> Yes to this one.
>>       as soon as you hit a rule you can't evaluate, block the edge, you're done.
> Nope, if you can't evaluate, you continue to later rules, to see if you can evaluate those.

Maybe we have a different meaning for "can't evaluate", my meaning was "prom is down/we don't have data for some reason/we got a 503 on the request".  And if that is the meaning then the problem is that if an earlier rule *should have* blocked the edge, but instead we failed to evaluate it for some reason, and then a later rule allows the edge, you'll end up allowing the edge when you should have blocked it.

If you meant "can't evaluate" in the sense of "for some reason it doesn't make sense to evaluate this rule on this cluster", then i guess we need to list all the outcomes even more carefully.

it's also a little difficult to reason about what it means to have a rule evaluate as "success".  It implies that for the rule, the cluster matches the rule.  But since we ultimately want to "allow this edge if the cluster does NOT meet these conditions" you end up having to write the rules as "not has-condition-foo" so that when it evaluates to true the edge is blocked.

and yes, what scott said

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Reviewer 4: > If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.
>  If you hit an unknown result while walking the rule set, you are Recommended=Unknown

so if no condition can be evaluated, we're in recommended=false
but if you only hit one that can't be evaluated you're in recommended=unknown?

Fundamentally i think this idea of reasoning through ordered rules and having to consider which rule will actually become relevant depending on which results earlier rules get, is very complicated.

not clear why we wouldn't just AND rules together if/when we reach the point of needing multiple rules (even if one is a promql rule and another is a straight "platform=x" rule)

`!vsphere && !(baremetal+proxy) && !ppc64`

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Reviewer 7: `matchingRules` can probably be best understood by adding some concrete examples with explanations for each.

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Author: How about:

>  Consumers should walk the array in order.  For a given entry, if a condition type is unrecognised, or fails to evaluate, consumers should proceed to the next entry.  If a condition successfully evaluates, that result is used, and no futher entries should be attempted.  If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Reviewer 7: This is understandable to me. I thought we were going to use `match` but I'm not sure it's use would make this any more clear.

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Author: matching vs. not matching are two subsets of successful evaluation.  How about:

> Consumers should walk the array in order. For a given entry, if a condition type is unrecognized, or fails to evaluate, consumers should proceed to the next entry. If a condition successfully evaluates (either as a match or as an explicit does-not-match), that result is used, and no further entries should be attempted. If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

?

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Reviewer 2: @wking Lets go with your most recent suggestion in this thread. LGTM

>   If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Author: Pushed through with 1449253 -> fff9d3c.

    For example, `type: promql` identifies the condition as [the `promql` type](#promql).
  Additional properties for each entry are defined in [the cluster-condition type registry](#cluster-condition-type-registry).

[The schema version][graph-data-schema-version] would also be bumped to 1.1.0, because this is a backwards-compatible change.
Consumers who only understand graph-data schema 1.0.0 would ignore the `matchingRules` property and block the edge for all clusters.
The alternative of failing open is discussed [here](#failing-open).

### Cluster-condition type registry

This registry contains the set of known cluster-condition types, and will be extended if and when future enhancements propose new types.

#### promql

The `type: promql` condition entry is an [object][json-object] with the following additional property:

* `promql` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a [PromQL][] query classifying clusters.
  This query will be evaluated on the local cluster, so it has access to data beyond the subset that is [uploaded to Telemetry][uploaded-telemetry].

>   The query should return a 1 in the happy case (update should be allowed) and a 0 in the sad case (update should be blocked).

Reviewer 8: If the value is optional, how should it be interpreted if it is empty?

Author: Empty is "failed to evaluate".  I've pushed af6d5bb -> 3c5ce31 to call that out explicitly, and link to the existing alternatives section.

* `qualifiers` (optional, [array][json-array], with qualifications around the recommendation.
  Consumers should evaluate all entries, and only recommend the update if there is at least one entry and all entries recommend the update.
  Each entry is an [object][json-object] with the following schema:
  * `url` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a URI documenting the issue, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
  * `reason` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a CamelCase reason, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
  * `message` (optional, [string][json-string]), with a human-oriented message describing the blocking reason, as described in [the blocked-edges section](#enhanced-graph-data-schema-for-blocking-edges).
  * `matchingRules` (optional, [array][json-array]), defining conditions for deciding which clusters have the update recommended and which do not.
    The array is ordered by decreasing precedence.
    Consumers should walk the array in order, and stop after the first rule they can successfully evaluate.

>     If no condition can be successfully evaluated, the update should not be recommended.

Reviewer 4: same comment as https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/821/files#r705596160

Author: GitHub's `/files#r...` links are not stable.  [Here][1]'s a stable `#discussion_r...` link.  And closing this thread in favor of that one, so I can keep track of the outstanding threads, but obviously if we pivot `matchingRules` wording, I'll come through and drop the new wording in all the `matchingRules` laters.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/821#discussion_r705596160

// +optional
conditionalUpdates []ConditionalUpdate `json:"conditionalUpdates,omitempty"`
```

The `availableUpdates` documentation will be adjusted to read:

```go
// availableUpdates contains updates recommended for this
// cluster. Updates which appear in conditionalUpdates but not in
// availableUpdates may expose this cluster to known issues. This list
// may be empty if no updates are recommended, if the update service
// is unavailable, or if an invalid channel has been specified.
```

The new ConditionalUpdate type will have the following schema:

```go
// ConditionalUpdate represents an update which is recommended to some
// clusters on the version the current cluster is reconciling, but which
// may not be recommended for the current cluster.
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen=true
type ConditionalUpdate struct {
	// release is the target of the update.
	// +required
	release Release `json:"release"`

	// qualifiers represents the range of issues associated with
	// updating to the target release. The cluster-version
	// operator will evaluate all entries, and only recommend the
	// update if there is at least one entry and all entries
	// recommend the update.
	// +optional

> 	Qualifiers []ConditionalUpdateQualifier `json:"qualifiers,omitempty"`

Reviewer: While better than `blockedClusters`, this still looks more like criteria to me.

Reviewer 4: how about Requirements?  (and `ConditionalUpdateRequirement`)

but i'd be happy with it as is, or with Criteria also.

Author: `qualifiers` is now `risks`, which folks seem to be ok with 🤞

	// conditions represents the observations of the conditional update's
	// current status. Known types are:
	// * Recommended, for whether the update is recommended for the current cluster.
	// +patchMergeKey=type
	// +patchStrategy=merge
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=type
	Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty" patchStrategy:"merge" patchMergeKey:"type" protobuf:"bytes,1,rep,name=conditions"`
}
```

The new ConditionalUpdateQualifier type will have the following schema:

```go
// ConditionalUpdateQualifier represents a reason and cluster-state
// for not recommending a conditional update.
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen=true
type ConditionalUpdateQualifier struct {
	// url contains information about this qualifier.
	// +optional
	URL URL `json:"url,omitempty"`

	// reason is the CamelCase reason for not recommending a
	// conditional update, in the event that qualifiers match the
	// cluster state.
	// +optional

> 	Reason string `json:"reason,omitempty"`

Reviewer: is this the logical key of your slice?  If so, how would it be different than a Name?

Author: This and the message are named to match the existing condition properties, because the CVO will be inserting these in the `Recommended` condition unless it can decide that the particular risk does not apply to the current cluster state.

Reviewer: When the API PR is created, you'll need to select a key for the slice.  I think users more naturally refer to Names.  I'm willing to re-litigate in an API PR.

Author: It's not just an openshift/api.  It will also go into graph-data (openshift/cincinnati-graph-data#1056), and be consumed and emitted by openshift/cincinnati.  I prefer `reason` to match the `Recommended` condition, but I'm fine using `name` since you prefer that after hearing my reasoning.  I've pushed 6be15d9 -> e8c0849 to move to `name`.

	// contain Line Feed characters (U+000A), which should be
	// rendered as new lines.
	// +optional
	Message string `json:"message,omitempty"`

	// matchingRules is a slice of conditions for deciding which
	// clusters have the update recommended (happy conditions) and
	// which do not (sad conditions). The slice is ordered by
	// decreasing precedence. The cluster-version operator will
	// walk the slice in order, and stop after the first it can
	// successfully evaluate. If no condition can be successfully
	// evaluated, the update will not be recommended.
	// +optional
	MatchingRules []ClusterCondition `json:"matchingRules,omitempty"`
}
```

The new ClusterCondition type will have the following schema:

```go
// ClusterCondition represents an update which is recommended to some
// clusters on the version the current cluster is reconciling, but which
// may not be recommended for the current cluster.
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen=true
type ClusterCondition struct {
	// type represents the cluster-condition type. This defines
	// the members and semantics of any 'extra' properties.
	// +required
	Type string

	// Extra represents unstructured, type-specific properties.
	// +optional

> 	Extra map[string]interface{}

Reviewer: discriminated unions are made with struct pointers.  This allows definitive schema definitions and explicit godoc.  Maps do not.

Reviewer 8: We want to spell out the other fields like `PromQL` here as members of `ClusterCondition` so we can document each of them.

Author: Let's collapse "how to handle a discriminated union?" down into [this thread][1], since it links prior art.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/821#discussion_r705596959

}
```

> To work around [Go's lack of inline unions][go-union], we explicitly define the serialization:

Reviewer 4: i don't understand this, we have implemented discriminated unions in our api w/o specalized serialization elsewhere, e.g.:

https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/85977bee07221f012896dcc53b77f44da0be0c4e/build/v1/types.go#L413-L437

Author: I've pushed 97f1ff4 with a new *Discriminating union implementation* section trying to outline some options and explain my choice.

Author: ok, a bunch more hashing out (mostly reflected in new *Alternatives* sections), and now we have a central, struct-pointer discriminated union in 6be15d990bb12c4b215ed17cf02e9b367bf495be.
